NARRATOR: One question:
Why is there such a
stunning diversity of life?
One answer: Evolution.
Charles Darwins brilliant theory
that explains how
species adapt and change.
Its been called the best
idea anyone ever had.
But theres one big problem:
How does it actually work?
Now, extraordinary science
is answering that question.
It is uncovering the
hidden mechanisms
inside creatures bodies
that can explain astonishing
transformations,
like how birds can
evolve from dinosaurs...
why a fish was once
your ancestor...
and, above all,
what makes us human.
Right now on NOVA,
youll find out what
Darwin never knew.
NARRATOR: The Tree of
Life on earth is one
of stunning diversity.
9.000 species of birds.
350,000 kinds of beetles.
28,000 types of fish.
Two million living
species and counting.
And we are just one of them.
(birds calling)
But why is there such an
amazing variety of animals?
Why are there so
many types of fish?
So many different
species of beetle?
How did this extraordinary
profusion of life
on earth come about?
Today, we celebrate the man
who would ultimately
answer that question.
Charles Darwin.
He was born 200 years ago
and it is 150 years since
he published the work
that has become the bedrock
of our understanding
of life on earth.
CLIFF TABIN: What Darwin wanted
to understand was how you get
this extraordinary
diversity of life on earth.
He was spot on.
He really nailed it.
NARRATOR: Darwins
theory of evolution--
his account of why
species adapt and change--
has been called the best
idea anyone ever had.
But even Darwin admitted that
his work was incomplete.
Vast questions were
still unanswered.
And the biggest
question was: How?
How did evolution take place?
SEAN CARROLL: He didnt
know any of the mechanics
of that process.
He didnt understand
the physical forces
that would actually change
the way species appeared.
NARRATOR: But today,
we can answer the questions
that Darwin could not.
We can look under
the hood of evolution
and see exactly how
this mysterious process
gives rise to such
astounding diversity.
TABIN: Whats incredible
about this time
from a scientific
perspective is,
were going to be able to
understand that diversity.
And that just adds
to the excitement.
It doesnt demystify it.
It makes it all
the more magical.
NARRATOR: And this is the magic
and mystery of evolution.
Over eons of time, a single
species gives rise to many.
An ancient fish evolves
to become the ancestor
of all four-limbed
animals, even us.
And one species, our own,
develops a large and
uniquely complex brain,
enabling us to
dominate the planet.
This is the search
for the answers
to what Darwin never knew.
(children chattering)
Darwin began his love
affair with nature
when he was a child,
just like many of
his modern followers,
including evolutionary
biologist, Sean Carroll.
CARROLL: I developed my interest
in animals the same way I think
most biologists did,
which was either
going out in the backyard
or going to zoos.
And anytime I got a
chance, Id flip over logs
and look for salamanders
and snakes and frogs
and things like this.
And I was just fascinated with
their patterns and behavior.
NARRATOR: So it was with
the young Charles Darwin.
CARROLL: Young Charles liked to
traipse around the outdoors.
He loved to collect
beetles and things.
He was a completely
ordinary kid.
And he didnt like school.
In fact, he was such a poor
student that his father,
a rather successful physician
and a pretty imposing figure,
was worried about Darwins
direction in life.
NARRATOR: So his father
packed him off to Edinburgh,
the finest medical school in
Europe, to become a doctor.
But young Charles was
just too squeamish.
CARROLL: And he was really
horrified by medical school.
He witnessed an
operation on a child
and this is in the era
before anesthetics.
And he just fled the operating
theater vowing never to return.
NARRATOR: Next,
his father sent him
to Cambridge to
study for the clergy.
He didnt succeed
at that either,
but he did find his
direction in life,
reviving his childhood
interest in nature.
CARROLL: Darwin starts on his
path to his divinity degree
and he starts to
mature as a student.
He becomes more serious
about some subjects,
particularly natural history,
and he learns a lot more
about botany and about
geology and these things.
Hes becoming a pretty
solid field scientist.
NARRATOR: His reputation
as a naturalist
gained him a
spectacular invitation.
CARROLL: Charles
was offered a place
on the British Navy
ship the HMS Beagle,
whose mission was to survey the
waters around South America.
Now, the captain of the Beagle
wanted a well-educated,
scientific person aboard,
and a dinner companion,
somebody to share
conversation with.
And Darwin fit the
bill perfectly.
NARRATOR: And so,
Charles Darwin set off
on a fateful voyage
that would revolutionize
our understanding
of lifes great diversity.
The voyage of the Beagle
took nearly five years.
It wove its way from
the Cape Verde islands
and along the coast of Brazil.
It was in Argentina that he made
his first important discovery.
CARROLL: Early
on in the voyage,
Darwin found some
amazing fossils.
He dug up some skulls,
some jaws, some backbones
of what turned out
to be giant mammals.
Now, these were clearly extinct
and Darwin began to ponder,
what was the relationship
of those fossils
to the living animals
of South America.
NARRATOR: But one port
of call on Darwins voyage
proved more important
than all the others.
The Galapagos.
This cluster of 13
isolated islands
lies 600 miles off the coast of
Ecuador in the Pacific Ocean.
These islands are home
to unusual animals
found nowhere else on earth.
Penguins that live at the
equator and swim in warm water,
instead of the frigid
seas of the South Pole.
Giant tortoises that
weigh up to 600 pounds.
Iguanas, huge lizards that
swim and dive in the sea.
Everywhere else, they
dwell only on land.
(barking)
Traveling for the first
time in the Galapagos,
Sean Carroll is seeing
the same creatures
that so intrigued Darwin.
CARROLL: Of all animals, I
think these marine iguanas
are the greatest symbol
of the Galapagos,
what I most wanted to see here.
And to see them in
their native habitat,
blending against
that black rock,
just as Darwin described it...
Its an absolute thrill.
DARWIN (dramatized): Its a
hideous looking creature,
of a dirty black color,
stupid and sluggish
in its movements.
Theyre as black as the porous
rocks over which they crawl.
NARRATOR: Darwin
meticulously described
the iguanas in his diary.
But he was far from the
scientific authority
he would become.
CARROLL: The Darwin
that arrived here
was not the great theorist
that we know today.
He was a 26-year-old
collector, collecting
really, almost at random,
any kind of plants,
any kind of animals,
any kinds of rocks.
He didnt even know the meaning
of what he was collecting
until much later.
NARRATOR: He was
also fascinated by
the giant tortoises,
which allowed him to
ride on their backs
as they slowly lumbered around.
DARWIN: I frequently
got on their backs
and then, upon giving
a few raps on the hinder
part of the shell,
they would rise
up and walk away.
But I found it very
difficult to keep my balance.
NARRATOR: Darwin measured the
creatures extreme slowness.
About four miles a
day, he calculated.
But the local people knew
something else
about the tortoises.
(whispering): They
could tell which island
any tortoise came from
just by looking at its shell.
NARRATOR: Their shells differed
depending on which
island they lived on.
Some tortoises had shells
shaped like a dome.
Others had shells arcing over
their heads like a saddle.
Others differed subtly in color.
Or by how much the bottom
of the shell flared out.
Darwin had literally
been sitting on a clue--
a way to understand the
great diversity of life,
but he didnt yet realize it.
(birds calling)
Instead, Darwin turned
his attention to birds.
The islands were full
of what seemed to be
a familiar assortment
of species.
So, he stuffed
his collecting bag
with what he thought
were types of finches,
grosbeaks, wrens
and blackbirds.
And then, after five
weeks in the Galapagos,
Darwin and the Beagle went to
other ports in the Pacific
and finally set sail for home.
On board, he started
to sort through
the vast number of
specimens he had collected
on the five-year voyage.
But it was not until
he returned to Britain
that he was able to
make sense of them.
It began with a
startling revelation.
All the different
birds he had collected
actually were variations
of a single type.
CARROLL: He learns
that those birds he had
collected on the Galapagos
actually represent 13
different species of finch.
NARRATOR: What
misled Darwin was that they
looked radically different.
Some had wide, tough beaks.
Others had long slender ones.
And these differences depended
on which islands they lived on.
CARROLL: Now, why
would that be?
Why would there be
slightly different birds,
slightly different species
on different islands
all in one part of the world?
NARRATOR: Darwin now thought
back to the Galapagos tortoises.
They too differed
from island to island.
His brain began racing.
CARROLL: Thoughts are
starting to crystallize,
take shape in his mind,
bit by bit, bit by bit.
He starts this process he
describes as mental rioting.
Just stream of consciousness
where hes jotting down note
after note after note.
Thoughts as they occur to him.
And finally, they
converge on this one idea.
NARRATOR: What
Darwin now realized
was that somehow, for some
reason, species change.
Originally, there
must have been
just one type of finch
in the Galapagos,
but over time it had diversified
into many kinds, with
different beak shapes.
The same for the tortoises.
One type of tortoise must
have turned into many kinds,
with different shells depending
on which island they lived on.
With this great insight,
Darwin entered
dangerous new territory.
The standard view at the time
was that God had
created every species.
And that what God had
created was perfect
and could not change.
CARROLL: But Darwin said no.
Why would the Creator
bother with making
slightly different finches
for each of these different
islands that all looked alike?
NARRATOR: The prevailing
view just didnt make sense.
But this was only the beginning
of Darwins revolution.
He turned his attention
to the fossils
he had collected
in South America.
One was of a giant sloth.
Another was of a huge
armadillo-like creature.
These animals were extinct,
but little sloths still
existed in South America.
And so did smaller armadillos.
What could this mean?
CARROLL: It dawned on him that
they resembled each other.
So, what he had
found in the ground
were the buried ancestors of the
living animals of South America.
NARRATOR: So, again,
here was more evidence
that species changed.
Somehow, these ancient giants
must have been transformed
into the smaller
creatures we see today.
But what Darwin
would later find out
took this idea of
how species change
into a completely new league.
In Victorian times,
scientists routinely
studied life-forms at
the embryonic stage.
How these tiny forms develop
from just a single cell
into an entire creature
has long been seen
as one of the wonders of nature.
Watching a developing embryo
is truly the most glorious
miracle of nature.
I mean, you know, no bologna.
NARRATOR: What Darwin
learned from studying
the embryos amazed him.
In snake embryos, you
could see tiny bumps.
The bony rudiments of legs.
But these would never
develop in the adult snake.
Darwin wondered,
Were snakes somehow
descended from
animals with legs?
He learned that whales, which
have no teeth as adults,
had them as embryos.
Those teeth disappeared
before they were born.
To Darwin, it had to mean
whales were descended from
creatures with teeth.
But human embryos provided
the most startling evidence.
Under the microscope,
tiny slits around the
neck were clearly visible.
Exactly the same structures
were found in fish.
But in fish, they
turned into gills.
In humans, they became the
bones of our inner ear.
Surely, this showed that humans
must be descended from fish.
Its an astonishing thought.
JUDSON: I dont know about your
ancestors, but mine included
priests and, you know, the,
the usual, the usual suspects.
But the idea that all
of us have, have fish
in our family tree,
I think its amazing.
NARRATOR: And
so, Darwin arrived at an
astonishing conclusion,
one that would become
central to his understanding
of the great diversity of life.
Darwin had this amazingly bold
idea-- the Tree of Life--
that all species were connected.
And what it meant was,
if you go far enough back
in our family tree of
humans, youll come to fish.
If you go far enough back in
the family tree of birds,
youll come to dinosaurs.
So that creatures that dont look
anything at all like each other
are actually deeply connected.
No one came close to having
this idea before Darwin.
NARRATOR: This seemed
to be an explanation
for the vast
diversity of animals.
Beginning with a
common ancestor,
over time across generations,
species could change
dramatically.
Some might add
new body features.
Others might drop them.
Ultimately, one
type of creature
could be transformed into
something utterly different.
Its a process Darwin called
descent with modification.
But it all begged a question.
Why?
What was making
creatures change?
Darwin needed clues.
And he found them in a
very surprising place.
Dogs.
Big, small, fat, tall.
The British have long
been obsessed by them.
It was a full-blown love
affair in Victorian England.
Even Her Majesty was dog crazy.
That love affair
still continues today.
Especially among scientists
like Heidi Parker
at the National
Institutes of Health.
So, one of the most
interesting things about dogs
is the kind of
variation that you have.
We have dogs the
size of groundhogs
versus a dog like
Zeppie, the Leonberger,
who can get to be the
size of a mule deer.
If we had that kind of
size variation in humans,
we would have people running
around the size of Barbie dolls.
NARRATOR: In his day,
Darwin knew this range of sizes
hadnt come about by chance.
Through a careful
process of selection,
dog breeders mix different dogs
with different physical
traits to create new forms.
Darwin was intrigued
by what he was seeing
breeders doing with
the domestic dog.
They could select
for individual traits
like size or shape,
and they could actually
change their breed.
NARRATOR: The
Whippet, for example,
had been developed
to chase rabbits.
It was created by mixing
greyhounds for speed,
with terriers, used
to hunt small game.
And then it hit Darwin.
Was there a similar form of
selection going on in nature,
but without human interference?
Could natural selection
explain the great
diversity of life?
CARROLL: It was brilliant.
He took something very
familiar and comfortable,
for example, animal breeding,
and explained that the same sort
of thing was going on in nature
just at a little bit different
pace and with no human guide.
NARRATOR: But what
could be carrying out
selection in the wild?
It was then that Darwin took a
completely fresh look at nature.
The Victorian view of
nature was sentimental.
Lambs lay down with lions.
But Darwins travels
on the Beagle
led him to a different view.
For Darwin, nature was savage.
Every creature was
locked in a desperate
struggle for survival,
ultimately ending in death.
The scale of death in nature
is absolutely horrendous.
And sometimes its not just
that theres a lot of death,
but its very unpleasant death.
NARRATOR: But in
all this brutal chaos,
Darwin saw a pattern.
CARROLL: Darwin showed that
nature was a battlefield
and that everything
was in competition.
And this brutal battle,
this war of nature
as Darwin described it, was
actually a creative process.
NARRATOR: The pattern
that Darwin saw
was that the creatures that
survived were those best adapted
to the specific
environments they lived in.
For instance, some could
handle extremes of climate.
Others were brilliantly
honed killing machines,
perfect for catching
the available prey.
Still others were perfect
to evade those who
might be hunting them.
But how did this
harsh view of nature
explain the finches
on the Galapagos,
where Darwin observed that the
birds on different islands
had different beak shapes?
Somehow, those different beaks
must be helping the
finches survive.
TABIN: The finches of
the Galapagos Islands
have beaks of many
sizes and shapes.
And theres a reason for that.
They use their beaks as tools.
Now, if you think of the
type of tool you would want
to crush a seed
thats very tough,
but is the food that
you really like,
youd want a beak like this,
which is the type of beak
the ground finch has.
On an island where the
only food is seeds that
are hard to crack,
a short, powerful beak will
mean a finch will survive.
But on another island,
the available food
isnt seeds but flowers.
If you wanted to get into narrow
spaces to get pollen and nectar
that are very hard to get at,
you wouldnt need a
big, strong beak,
youd need a probing beak.
NARRATOR: So, on a
different island,
where you have a
different food source,
you have a different beak shape.
And this pattern was repeated
across the Galapagos.
It seems that the finches beaks
had altered to fit the diet
of each particular island.
And that was how one
original type of finch
had been transformed into many.
But how had these
changes come about?
Here, Darwin had another clue.
He could see it
in his own family.
As every parent knows,
no two children are
ever exactly the same.
Charles looked different
from his brother, Erasmus,
even though they shared
the same parents.
Charless children looked a bit
like him and his wife Emma.
But they too looked
different from each other.
That was something
he called variation.
He realized that not every
individual was the same,
stamped out like a
toy from a press.
But there was variation.
NARRATOR: Darwin
realized that variation
must be the starting point
for change in nature.
In any generation, the
animals in a litter
are never quite the same.
And in the wild,
such a tiny variation
might make all the difference
between life and death.
Two penguins, for instance,
might differ a tiny bit
in the thickness
of their blubber--
a big factor if you
live in extreme cold.
In a harsh climate, the
environment will select
who will live and who will die.
And slowly, Darwin suggested,
over many, many generations,
these tiny variations would
allow the fit to get fitter
and the unfit would vanish.
These variations accumulate
and eventually, new
species branch off.
This is evolution by
natural selection.
It is one of the keys to
how new species are formed.
And so, in 1859, after years
of painstaking research,
Darwin finally published
his masterwork,
On the Origin of Species.
It is still impossible to
overstate its importance.
It was really a quantum
advance in understanding.
It shook people up, it changed
the way people thought.
NARRATOR: Gone was the
idea that all species
were created perfect
and immutable,
taken as an article of faith.
In its place, Darwin provided
a proper scientific theory,
based on facts and observation.
It is much more than the
presentation of simply
the idea of natural selection.
It is a, its a vision
of how evolution by
natural selection works.
150 years later, his theory
has stood the test of time.
CARROLL: Whats amazing is that
Darwin got so much right.
His ideas largely
stay intact today.
NARRATOR: But Darwin himself
acknowledged that there
were holes in his theory.
He didnt actually
know how it worked.
What was happening
inside a creatures body
that makes it change?
But now, at last,
modern science is
providing the answers
through a hidden mechanism that
Darwin knew nothing about.
Arizonas Pinacarte Desert
is a harsh and brutal place.
Especially if youre
a rock pocket mouse.
NACHMAN: Theyre the
Snickers bar of the desert.
They really are, theyre
eaten by everything.
Theyre probably eaten
by foxes and coyotes
and rattlesnakes, owls.
NARRATOR: Weighing
just half an ounce,
this mouse could never fight
off these large predators.
Its best hope for
survival is camouflage.
Not surprisingly,
its fur matches the color
of the Pinacarte rocks.
But in some sections
of the desert,
the environment is different.
Ancient volcanoes erupted
and now the desert
is a patchwork
of dark lava and light rock.
But of course, a light mouse on
a dark rock is easy pickings.
So, something has happened that
Darwin might have predicted.
The mice now living
on the dark rocks
have evolved darker fur.
Those that stayed on the
light rocks remain light.
Michael Nachman was fascinated.
How had this happened?
To find out, he first
needed to catch some mice.
So, with Sean Carroll,
he visits a line of traps
he set the previous night.
NACHMAN: All of the dark
ones have a white underbelly
and presumably, theres no
selection for dark on the belly
because predators are
going, coming from above.
NARRATOR: This much
Darwin could have done.
Find some mice and compare
the color of their fur
to their environment.
But Nachman can now do something
that Darwin never could.
He can look inside
the animals DNA.
The study of DNA is one
of the great triumphs
of modern science.
It has taken our understanding
of how creatures
evolve and develop
to a level that Darwin could
never have dreamed of.
CARROLL: The DNA molecule is one
of the real secrets of life.
Its a perfect system
for storing the vast
amounts of information
thats necessary for building
all kinds of creatures.
NARRATOR: DNA consists
of one long molecule
spiraling around
in a double helix.
That helix is, in turn, made
up of four smaller molecules,
called by the letters
G, A, T and C.
DNA can be found in the cells
of every living thing on earth.
JUDSON: The thing about DNA
that I think is remarkable
is that the molecule
itself is so elegant.
With a small
number of letters,
you can say almost
infinite words.
NARRATOR: And that is the key.
DNA is a code and its
double strand contains
all the information
to make living things
grow and develop.
Lined along each DNA
molecule are ranged
special sequences of this
code that form our genes.
Many genes get
translated into proteins.
And these proteins make
the stuff of our bodies.
One protein makes hair.
Another makes cartilage.
Others make muscle.
CARROLL: What makes
DNA so amazing
is that it just
contains four letters,
but all sorts of combinations
of those four letters
contains all the
information for making
all the creatures that
are on the planet.
NARRATOR: Its a
gene that determines
whether our eyes
are blue or not.
Another gives us freckles.
Another gives us dimples.
But DNA has one
other vital quality.
It doesnt stay the same.
(crying)
When a baby is conceived,
the fertilized egg receives
half its DNA from the mother
and half from the father,
creating wholly
new combinations.
Its why we look a
bit like our parents,
but also different.
Another way that DNA
can change is mutation.
CARROLL: Mutation is
a critical ingredient
in the recipe for evolution.
Without mutation, everything
would stay constant
generation after generation.
Mutation generates
variation, differences
between individuals.
NARRATOR: Mutations can happen
as our DNA copies itself
when our cells divide
and our bodies develop.
An A for instance,
can be replaced by a G
or a C by a T.
This can cause minute changes
that no one is even aware of.
But when mutations occur
in the cells we pass
down to our children,
they can cause big changes.
Like turning a
light-colored mouse dark.
Mutation seems to mean that
something bad has happened.
Well, mutations are
neither good or bad.
Whether they are favored,
or whether they are rejected,
or whether theyre just neutral
depends upon the conditions
an organism finds itself.
So for the pocket mouse,
a mutation that caused
the mouse to turn black...
That is good if youre living
on black rock, its
bad if youre living
out in the sandy desert.
NARRATOR: It was
that mutation,
the one that turned a
light-colored mouse dark,
that Michael Nachman
was hunting for.
Back in the lab, he began
the painstaking business
of comparing the genes
of the two types of mice,
trying to pinpoint
any differences.
NACHMAN: Science is fun
when you really dont know
what youre going to find.
NARRATOR: One by one the
genes in the two mice
proved identical.
But then, in one gene,
he found something.
There were four places
where the sequence
of As, Ts, Cs
and Gs were different..
When a mouse is born
with these mutations,
its fur grows dark.
And that means it can
survive on the dark rocks
when others would not.
Here was a clear
example of evolution
and natural selection at work.
I think Darwin would
have been delighted
to know that we
can find the genes
that are responsible for
evolutionary change.
NARRATOR: And this was
just one of many links
that have been found between
genetic mutations and evolution.
Scientists can now pinpoint
a range of examples of
evolution in action.
The Colobus monkey
can see in color
because of a
mutation in one gene.
It can now tell
nutritious red leaves
from tough, old green ones.
A genetic glitch gave
this Antarctic fish
a potent antifreeze
in its blood.
So it can survive
in the icy waters
when others cannot.
So powerful was
this link between
genetic mutation and evolution
that an idea took hold.
To understand how
evolution works,
all you need to do is
compare creatures genes.
One might think that you could
understand all of evolution
simply by mapping the
genes of every creature.
Identify all the genes,
identify all the differences
and you could explain the
differences between, say,
mouse and monkeys and humans.
NARRATOR: So when the Human
Genome Project began in 1990,
the scientific world
was on tenterhooks.
All three billion
letters of our DNA
were going to be
identified in order.
In parallel, the
DNA of some animals
and plants was also
being sequenced.
Surely, this would be a quantum
leap in our understanding
of how different
life-forms evolved.
With this came another idea:
that complex animals like us
would have many more
genes than simpler ones.
Here we are, the most complex
and sophisticated animal
on the planet, right?
You might think
that would require
a whole lot more
genetic information.
NARRATOR: The betting was on.
Just how big would our genome be
compared to other life-forms?
There were estimates
that humans would have
between, lets say,
80,000 and 120,000 genes.
NARRATOR: So when
the final answer came in
2003, it was a shocker.
23,000 genes-- the same
number as a chicken...
less than an ear of corn.
LEVINE: I mean, people
were freaked out
by the relatively
small number of genes.
Its down to something
like 22,000 or 23,000
protein-coding genes
in the human genome.
The simple nematode worm
has about that same number.
And there are plants that
have considerably more genes
than the glorious human genome.
The whole human genome
project has been
a humbling experience,
as weve discovered
that, actually, it
doesnt take as many genes
to make a human as
we had all hoped.
NARRATOR: And it wasnt just
that we had so few genes,
but many of our key
genes were identical
to those of other animals.
Huge though the
breakthrough had been,
the genetic revolution
had opened up
a whole new set of puzzles.
As a solution to the mystery
of how evolution works,
genes and their mutations
were only part of the story.
There had to be something
else more subtle
and more mysterious going on.
CARROLL: We have
to explain then,
How do you get all
these differences
if you have really
similar sets of genes?
NARRATOR: The quest to uncover
what Darwin never knew
would have to start again.
The first tantalizing clues
would come from those life-forms
that Darwin himself
had studied: embryos.
Look at these embryos.
It is almost impossible to tell
just days after conception
which is the
chicken, the turtle,
the bat, the human.
They look almost the same.
Only as they grow does it
become clear which is which.
Darwin wondered, as
scientists do today,
How could they
start out so similar
and end up so different?
LEVINE: There is
something profound
about what the embryo
was telling us.
And we have rediscovered what
Darwin was talking about
all along, that the embryos
where the action is.
In terms of animal diversity,
it is the platform
for diversity.
NARRATOR: What fascinates
modern biologists
is that all these
different animals
dont just look the same,
they are using virtually
the same set of key genes
to build their bodies.
The body plan genes determine
where the head goes,
where the limbs go, and
what form they take--
whether they are arms,
legs or wings.
Another set of genes
determines an animals
body patterning:
the blotches, the
stripes and spots.
It is the same genes at
work in every creature
from the leopard to the peacock
to the fruit fly.
And yet they produce
radically different results.
This has led scientists
to a crucial insight
about how animal
bodies have evolved.
Its not the number
of genes that counts.
CARROLL: Its not
the genes you have,
but how you use
them that generates
the great diversity
of the animal kingdom.
NARRATOR: Finding out
just how these same genes
are used to create
such amazing diversity
has been the work
of Sean Carroll
and an unlikely hero
of modern science.
The fruit fly.
As much as Id like to
study the mammals of
the African Savannah,
they make poor choices
for laboratory animals.
Theyre large, expensive and
they reproduce very slowly.
To get data, we have to
find the simplest examples
to the phenomenon we
want to understand.
NARRATOR: But the humble
fruit fly does weird
and wonderful things.
This fruit fly is
dancing for sex.
A rapt female takes in the show.
Shes particularly besotted
by the dark spots
on the males wings.
Watching it all is an equally
besotted Sean Carroll.
CARROLL: You might think them
just be annoying, but
theyre really charming.
And the males of this species
does a rather elaborate
courtship dance,
where he displays these spotted
wings in front of the female.
To us, its as magnificent
as what a peacock does.
NARRATOR: But in some
species of fruit fly,
the males dont have wing spots.
CARROLL: Theres another
fruit fly species
thats different from
the spotted species
in two important ways:
it doesnt have
spots on its wings
and it does a lot less dancing.
NARRATOR: Here, then, is a
classic evolutionary puzzle.
Why does one type of fly have
spots and the other doesnt?
Sean Carroll wanted to know.
What is going on in their genes
that makes them different?
CARROLL: So we
wanted to take apart
the genetic machinery
for making wing spots
to understand how those
wing spots evolved.
NARRATOR: Carroll began the
process of sifting through
the two types of flies DNA.
He had one clue to
set him on his way.
He already knew the gene that
codes for the black wing spots.
He calls it the
paintbrush gene.
But surprisingly,
when he compared the
genes of the two flies,
they both had that gene.
And yet, only one had spots.
CARROLL: When we look at that
gene in the two species,
really they both have
this paintbrush gene.
So the big difference
is not having the gene,
its how they use it.
One species uses it in
the wing to make spots.
The other one doesnt.
NARRATOR: So why did
the paintbrush gene create
spots in one type of fly,
but not in the other?
In search of answers,
Carroll turned to one of the
least understood regions of DNA:
the vast stretches that were
once known as junk.
It has been called the
dark matter of the genome.
Mysterious.
Uncharted.
Strange.
The vast bulk of
the double helix,
some 98% of it, doesnt
code for proteins,
which make the
stuff of our bodies.
The genes which do,
comprise just two percent.
Even now, no one is sure
what much of this huge
non-coding area actually does,
but it has long beckoned
evolutionary detectives,
like Sean Carroll.
So, this is a bend.
Thats the fragment
to test. Yeah.
NARRATOR: Carroll had
already learned that the
paintbrush gene itself
was identical in the
two types of fly.
So he extended his search
through their DNA.
And in one place, just
outside the paintbrush gene,
he found an important clue.
A stretch of DNA
that was different
in the fly with wing spots.
What could this mean?
So Carroll conducted
an experiment.
He decided to put
that mysterious
stretch of DNA that he had
found in the spotted fly
in the unspotted fly.
To help him see if
it had any effect,
he attached it to a
gene from a jellyfish,
a gene that codes for a protein
that makes the jellyfish glow.
We cut the DNA up
into little pieces,
and we hook it up to a protein
that glows in the dark.
And then we inject that
into the unspotted fly.
NARRATOR: And then, something
remarkable happened.
CARROLL: When we looked
at those unspotted flies,
we see now their wings are
glowing in the dark with spots.
NARRATOR: Somehow that
mysterious stretch of DNA
had turned on the
paintbrush gene
in the unspotted flys wings.
Once spotless, now it
had luminous spots.
CARROLL: Bingo.
Wed found the piece
of DNA that mattered.
NARRATOR: Carroll had
found something that
is revolutionizing
our understanding
of how different
animal bodies have evolved.
A piece of DNA
called a switch.
Switches are not genes.
They dont make
stuff like hair,
cartilage or muscle.
But they turn on and
off the genes that do.
CARROLL: Switches are very
powerful parts of DNA,
because they allow
animals to use genes
in one place and not another,
at one time and not another.
And so, choreograph the spots
and stripes and blotches
of animal bodies.
NARRATOR: In the case
of the fruit fly,
its a mutation--
a change in just a
few letters of the DNA
that has caused the paintbrush
gene to be switched on.
And so, a whole new
species with wing spots
has been created.
But switches are now
explaining far more than that.
They are helping to solve many
perplexing evolutionary
questions.
Like how one creature
can become another creature
by losing it legs.
It all goes back to what Darwin
had seen in the snake embryo.
The rudiments of leg bumps.
This convinced him that
a snake must have evolved
from some four-legged animal.
Over the years that same
mysterious process,
the losing of legs, has been
seen in other creatures.
Like the whale.
Its front flippers
have all the bones
of a land creatures arm,
even the fingers.
And further back in its body...
...it has the
vestiges of a pelvis.
Clearly, it is descended
from an animal that
walked on the land.
KINGSLEY: Lots of animals
have evolved to slither through
the ground like snakes.
Other animals slither or
swim through the water
like whales.
So if you need a
streamlined body,
its good to get
rid of these things
that stick out from
the body, like limbs.
NARRATOR: Like the whale,
the manatee is another huge
mammal that lives in the sea.
And it, too, has
lost its hind legs.
How?
Darwin could never have
answered that question.
But now, thanks to
our understanding
of how DNA is
switched on and off,
and a very small fish,
we are getting a little closer.
In this lake in
British Columbia,
there is a creature that
really shouldnt be here.
A stickleback.
Most sticklebacks
live in the ocean.
But some 10,000 years ago,
a few were left
stranded in this lake,
cut off from the Pacific.
And over the years,
they have evolved.
The ocean stickleback
has a pair of fins on its belly
that are like spikes.
They are for defense.
The spikes make the
stickleback hard to eat.
But the lake sticklebacks
have lost those spikes
on their bellies.
And its this that
intrigues researchers
David Kingsley and his
colleague, Dolph Schluter.
To understand whats behind
it, they first identified
the gene that makes the
sticklebacks spikes.
Its one of those key body plan
genes and, not surprisingly,
they found it to be
identical in both
the ocean and the
lake stickleback.
The question was, why
hadnt in been turned on
in the lake stickleback,
which had lost its spikes?
Kingsley felt the answer
might lie in a switch.
KINGSLEY: We know these
genetic switches exist,
but theyre still
very hard to find.
We dont have a genetic code
that lets us read along
the DNA sequence and say,
Theres a switch, to turn a
gene on in a particular place.
NARRATOR: But eventually,
hunting through
the vast stretch of DNA
that does not code for
proteins, he found it.
A section of DNA that had
mutated in the lake stickleback.
These mutations meant that
the switch was broken.
It didnt turn on the
gene that makes spikes.
But this work may
have implications
far beyond sticklebacks.
They are convinced
that there is a link
between the stickleback
losing its spikes
and other creatures,
like a manatee,
losing their legs.
And they have two
tantalizing clues.
One-- the same body plan gene
that is responsible for
the stickleback spikes,
also plays a role in the
development of the hind limbs.
The second clue
is more tentative.
The lake stickleback may
have lost its spikes,
but evolution has left
behind some tiny remnants...
the traces of bones,
and they are lopsided--
bigger on the left
than on the right.
KINGSLEY: We thought,
Wouldnt it be amazing
if in fact this
classic unevenness is
the signature of
using the same gene
to control hind limb loss in an
incredibly different animal?
NARRATOR: So Kingsley and his
team went looking in manatees,
searching for this
lopsided pattern.
And they found it.
In box after box of
manatee skeletons,
they saw pelvic bones
that were bigger on the left
and smaller on the right.
Right now, Kingsley and
his team are looking
for the same switch
in the manatee
that caused the lake
stickleback to lose its spikes.
And if they find it, they will
have a powerful explanation
for something that
baffled Darwin--
how creatures like
manatees, whales and snakes
can evolve away their legs.
But all this begs
another question:
If switches can play
such a profound role
in the different shapes and
patterns of animal bodies--
from wing spots, to
spikes to hind legs--
what is throwing those
switches in the first place?
Researchers would see
the answer in animals
very familiar to Darwin--
those Galapagos finches.
Arkat Abzhanov and Cliff
Tabin have spent years trying
to find out exactly how
those Galapagos finches
got their different beaks.
Their starting point was
what they had learned
from Darwin himself.
Their beaks were vital
to the birds survival.
On an island where the
main food was seeds,
finches had short, tough
beaks for cracking them open.
On an island where the main
food was from flowers,
birds had long pointy beaks for
sucking up nectar and pollen.
And they knew something else.
The finches are born with
their beaks fully formed.
So the answer to why they had
such different beaks
must lie in something
that happened to them
as embryos in the egg.
TABIN: Something amazing
is happening inside those eggs.
Genes are turning
on and turning off.
And depending on exactly
how they turn on and off
will determine what
type of finch is formed.
NARRATOR: To find out
just what was going on,
the researchers first
had to collect some eggs.
(whispers): There she is.
She just came back. Yeah.
To lay eggs.
Its really likely that she
already has a clutch; great.
Shes coming out.
NARRATOR: Abzhanov checks
a ground finch nest
and finds a single egg.
He wont remove it,
because the mother
might abandon the nest.
Another nest already
has three eggs.
He takes one for his research,
as he knows the mother
will lay a replacement.
The team collects
several eggs,
with embryos at different
stages of development.
That way they will be
able to chart exactly
how the different beaks grow.
Back in the lab, they
can begin the process.
This cactus finch embryo
is well on the way
to its signature
long, pointy beak.
And this ground finch embryo is
growing a short, thick beak.
What we wanted to do was
try and understand the genes
that were involved in making
the beak the way it was--
making a big, broad
thick beak different
from a long, thin beak
or a short, thin beak.
NARRATOR: They concentrated
on a group of genes
known to control the
growth of birds faces.
As they looked, they saw
something intriguing.
One particular body plan gene
became active in
the ground finch
with the short, thick beak, on
the fifth day of development.
But it didnt go to work
in the cactus finch
with its long, slender
beak for another 24 hours.
This was a revelation.
The same genes were
responsible for the beaks
in all types of finch.
Any differences were in
timing and intensity.
TABIN: Weve got
it! We nailed it!
Its the same genes in
making a sharp, pointy beak
or a big, broad
nut-cracking beak.
Whats essential, what
makes the difference,
and all the difference, is how
much you turn the gene on,
when you turn it on,
when you turn it off.
NARRATOR: And the
revelations didnt end there.
There was something
special about this gene.
Like all body plan
genes, it doesnt actually
make the stuff of our bodies.
It didnt make the cartilage
for the finches beaks.
It throws switches.
And the switches then
turn on or off the genes
that do make the beak.
CARROLL: These are a
different type of gene.
Theyre genes that boss
other genes around.
Scientists now realize that not
all genes are created equal.
Some make the stuff
of our bodies.
And switches are needed
to turn many of these
stuff genes on and off.
The body plan genes are
what throw these switches,
which tell the stuff
genes what to do and when.
This subtle choreography
can have profound effects
on how different animal
bodies are formed.
And this knowledge
is helping us solve
perhaps the biggest
Darwinian puzzle of all:
the mystery of the
great transformations.
It all goes back to Darwins
idea of the tree of life.
That all life-forms are
ultimately related.
And from the earliest
common ancestor over
billions of years,
they have changed
and diversified
so that creatures that
started out looking the same
evolved to become
completely different.
And scientists have made
some amazing connections.
That dinosaurs share a
common ancestor with birds.
And that a fish must
have been the ancestor
of all four-limbed
creatures-- even us.
Of all his ideas,
this was probably
Darwins most astonishing.
CARROLL: It was
one thing to grasp
how two species of finch
could become different,
how their beak
shape could change.
That was a small step.
But what about the
big differences?
The differences, say, between
the fish that swim in the sea
and the animals
that walk on land?
How did those
changes take place?
NARRATOR: Over the years,
evidence for these great
transformations has been found.
For instance, just a year
after Darwin published
On the Origin of Species,
a fossil called
archaeopteryx
was discovered.
It had features of both
birds and dinosaurs.
And Darwin had seen equally
persuasive evidence in embryos.
Those slits in the ear of all
land creatures, even humans.
In us, they become tiny
bones in the inner ear.
But in fish, they
become gills.
A tantalizing hint
that land animals
must be descended from fish.
But the stumbling block
has always been how.
How could a fish develop
legs and walk on land?
Darwin had no idea.
But Neil Shubin was determined
to tackle that problem.
SHUBIN: It captured
my imagination.
I mean, heres a fin and on
the other side was a limb.
And they looked
different in many ways.
And I thought, Well, what a
first-class scientific problem
to devote my research to.
And Ive been
devoting pretty much
my research to it ever
since, over 20 years.
NARRATOR: The first
stage in Shubins quest
was to find a fossil.
If Darwin were right,
somewhere out there,
there had to be a
transitional form,
a fossil that was part fish,
but had the beginning of legs.
But where to look?
He had one clue.
The fossil record shows
that creatures with legs
first appeared some
365 million years ago.
Before that, they
were only fish.
So, summer after summer,
Shubin set up camp
on Ellesmere Island,
just a few hundred miles
from the North Pole.
It has exposed rock from that
crucial transitional time.
The scientists own video shows
how remote and
bleak the place was.
SHUBIN: Its cold.
Its about freezing every
day over the summer.
Winds are high.
They can get up to
50 miles an hour.
There are polar bears there.
We have to prepare
ourselves by carrying guns.
Its a beautiful place.
Youve got to love it.
Its my summer home.
NARRATOR: Each expedition was
costly, but after three of them
there was little to
show for their efforts.
A fourth trip seemed pointless.
SHUBIN: I remember
having a conversation with
my colleagues saying,
Well, should we go? Is this
really a waste of money?
This was our do-or-die moment.
And we almost didnt go.
NARRATOR: But they decided
to try one last time.
After three days, they
still hadnt found anything.
Then, just when no one was
expecting anything to happen...
A colleague was cracking rocks
and I was working about
five feet from him.
And I hear, Hey! Hey,
guys, whats this?
Sticking out of the cliff
was the snout of fish.
And not just any fish,
a fish with a flat head.
By seeing a flat-headed fish
in rocks about 375
million years old...
we knew we had found
what we were looking for.
NARRATOR: A flat snout
with upward staring eyes--
the signature of an animal
that pushes its head
out of the water.
And for that, it would have
needed something like arms.
SHUBIN: What we did
at that moment was all
jump around high-fiving.
It was, uh, you know,
there were only six of us
in the field that time,
so it was quite a scene.
NARRATOR: Back at home, Shubin
and his team got to work,
examining their
375-million-year-old fossil.
They named their new
finding Tiktaalik,
an Inuit word for
a freshwater fish.
Tiktaalik is a perfect
transitional form.
Much of its body
is that of a fish.
Its covered in scales.
But it also had something
very un-fishlike...
an arm-like fin, or
perhaps a fin-like arm.
Tiktaalik had the bone
structure that is seen
in the arms and legs of
every four-limbed animal.
One big bone at the top,
two bones underneath,
leading to a cluster of
bones in the wrist and ankle.
Its the same pattern that
is found in everything
from sheep, to sheepdogs,
to Shubin himself.
You now have an animal
that can push itself
up off the substrate,
either on the water
bottom or on land.
NARRATOR: One
obvious question was:
Why had Tiktaalik evolved
this new structure?
One possible answer is suggested
by other fossils found near it.
There are large predatory fish
about ten to 15 feet long
living alongside Tiktaalik.
NARRATOR: Tiktaalik was prey.
To survive, it
had few choices.
You can get big,
you can get armor
or you can get out of the way.
NARRATOR: Shubin thinks
Tiktaalik got out of the way.
With those arm-like fins, it
could have dragged itself
to safety on land
or in the shallows.
But this was only
half the answer.
What it doesnt show us is the
actual genetic mechanism,
the genetic recipe
that builds a fin
into that which builds a limb.
NARRATOR: At 375
million years old,
Tiktaaliks DNA had
vanished long ago.
Shubin needed a next-of-kin,
a fish relative that
was still alive.
SHUBIN: What we
needed was a creature
that was in the right part
of the evolutionary tree,
but also a fish that
has a very fleshy fin.
So the search was on.
NARRATOR: A number
of fish fit the bill.
But Shubin favored
one in particular...
the paddlefish.
SHUBIN: The paddlefish
is a really weird fish.
They developed this
really long snout.
And theyre really voracious.
They eat each other.
So oftentimes youll
lose a lot of your fish
when they swim together,
because theyll eat each other.
NARRATOR: Living in the shallow
waters of the Mississippi,
its also a living fossil.
Scientists have spent years
working out the relationships
between different
species of fish
and they know that
the paddlefish
is one of the last survivors
of the class to which
Tiktaalik once belonged.
But unlike Tiktaalik,
the paddlefish is
in plentiful supply.
Paddlefish is a common
source for caviar.
So wed get our paddlefish
from caviar farms.
NARRATOR: Intriguingly, even
though Tiktaalik is extinct,
the paddlefish is actually
the more primitive form.
Its fins bear far less relation
to an arm or leg
than Tiktaaliks.
And because they are related,
the two kinds of fish should
share the same genes.
So Shubin began looking
at paddlefish embryos,
hunting for the genes
that built its fins.
And soon he zeroed in
on one particular group
of body plan genes
called Hox genes.
Hox genes have been found
in all complex animals
from the velvet worm,
that dates back some
600 million years,
to the modern human.
And in all that time,
the letters of their DNA
have remained
virtually unchanged.
They are aristocrats
of the gene community,
near the very top of
the chain of command.
They give orders that cascade
through a developing embryo...
activating entire networks
of switches and genes
that make the parts of the body.
They are absolutely critical
to the shape and form
of a developing creature.
CARROLL: These genes
determine where the front
and the back of the
animals going to be--
the top, the bottom,
the left, right,
the inside, the outside-- where
the eyes are going to be,
where the legs are going to be,
where the guts going to be--
how many fingers
theyre going to have.
NARRATOR: Shubin found that
Hox genes had a key role
in the formation
of paddlefish fins.
One set of Hox genes orders
the first stage of
fin development--
a sturdy piece of cartilage
that grows out from the torso.
Amazingly, in all four-limbed
animals, even us.
Exactly the same genes create
the long upper arm bone.
In the paddlefish,
another set of Hox genes
command the next stage
of fin development.
Again, exactly the same genes
control the growth of
our two forearm bones.
Finally, the same genes,
working in a different order,
make the array of bones
at the end of the fin.
The same sequence
of the same genes
makes our fingers and toes.
This was a massive revelation.
Suddenly the origin of
creatures with arms and legs
didnt seem such a
huge leap after all.
If the same genes were
at work in Tiktaalik,
then many of the genes
needed to make legs and arms
were already being carried
around by prehistoric fish.
All it needed was
a few mutations--
a few changes to
the timing and order
of what was turned off and on,
and a fin could become a limb.
SHUBIN: Oftentimes
the origin of whole new
structures in evolution
doesnt involve the
origin of new genes
or whole new genetic recipes.
Old genes, old genetic
pathways can be reconfigured
to make marvelously
wonderful new things.
NARRATOR: So it is now possible
to answer what Darwin didnt know
and explain how all
four-legged creatures
could be descended from fish.
Around 375 million years ago,
a creature like Tiktaalik
was under attack...
harried by predators.
But some random changes to
the activity of the Hox genes
led to its fins, developing
a structure like a limb.
Tiktaalik could now haul itself
out of danger, onto dry land.
On land, it would have found a
world of plants and insects...
a world ripe for colonization...
a world perfect for
animals with arms and legs.
And so, over
millions of years,
these new limbs evolved,
changed and diversified.
Some became adapted for running.
Others for flying.
Some for digging.
Others for swinging.
And so four-limbed creatures
took over the world
in a multitude of
different ways.
And all because of some changes
to an ancient set of genes.
And this is the true wonder
of where our new understanding
of DNA has led us to.
There are genes that make
the stuff of our bodies,
switches that turn
them off and on,
and still other genes that
give those switches orders.
Together in a complex cascade
of timing and intensity,
they combine to produce
the amazing diversity
of life on this planet.
That truly is something
that Darwin never knew.
But can this new
science also explain
perhaps the most fundamental
question of all?
What makes us human?
The scope of human activity
is simply astounding.
What fascinated me were
all the crazy things
that humans do.
You look around the world,
and if there is something
bizarre and interesting
that you could be doing,
humans are up to it
somewhere in the world.
And when you look
at all of this,
you just have to ask yourself,
what makes us special?
What is the basis
for this humanness?
NARRATOR: For all
natures wonders,
the achievements of the
human mind are truly unique.
We are the only species
to think about what
others think about us,
to punish those who
have harmed others,
to create art...
music...
architecture...
to engage in science...
medicine...
the microchip.
Only we can destroy millions
at the push of a button.
Hardly surprising, then, that
for centuries we thought
that humans were different
from all other species,
better, created in
the image of God.
But then Darwin began to draw
conclusions from evidence
like gill slits in human embryos
that showed that we were
descended from fish.
(people exclaim)
But it was when he drew
parallels with other
close relatives that he
got into real trouble.
CARROLL: Shortly after
Darwin returned from
his voyage, in London,
an orangutan named
Jenny went on exhibit.
And this was a huge sensation.
This was the first great ape
to be exhibited in captivity.
And Darwin was absolutely taken
with how she was sort of
childlike in her ways.
And he saw a lot
of human behavior
in the way this
orangutan behaved.
NARRATOR: When Darwin suggested
that human beings must actually
be descended from apes,
he was savaged.
He was accused of
attacking that core belief
that humankind had been
created in the image of God
above all other creatures.
But today the idea that we share
a common ancestor with apes
is completely
accepted in biology.
Instead, as a result of
having sequenced the genomes
of both humans and apes, we
face a very different puzzle.
Katie Pollard is an
expert on chimp DNA.
Given all the obvious
differences between humans
and chimps, you might expect
our DNA to be really different.
But in fact, its more
like 99% identical.
NARRATOR: Just a one-percent
difference in the
DNA of humans and chimps.
The mystery facing
modern science is
not how can such different
animals be related,
but how can such closely related
species be so different?
That really is something
that Darwin never knew,
but slowly, scientists are
starting to find the answers.
And one answer begins with
insights into the genetics
of a key human
organ, our hands.
The human hand is a marvel,
nimble and dexterous.
Nothing quite like it exists
anywhere else in nature.
It offers us a
unique combination
of precision and power,
and much of that is down to one
particular digit, our thumb.
One of the features of the
human hand is our ability
to touch all four
fingers with the thumb.
And that allows us to
make grips like this,
gives us a lot of precision.
The power grip is the ability
to put a lot of strength
into this sort of contact.
So if youre holding a ball,
youre basically pinching it,
and we can put a lot
of strength into that.
NARRATOR: The better to
throw a fastball with.
Finding out why we have
such versatile hands
compared to our nearest
relatives is the task
of Jim Noonan at
Yale University.
He began sifting through that
vital one percent of DNA
that is different in
humans from chimps.
NOONAN: Its kind of one of
the fundamental questions
in science is: What
makes us who we are?
And thats really what
were trying to get to;
what makes humans human.
NARRATOR: It was slow work.
One percent may not
sound like much,
but its still some 30 million
of DNAs chemical letters--
As, Ts, Cs and Gs.
NOONAN: The genomes a big place.
And just by looking at
sequence, you really cant tell,
for the most part, what is
important and what isnt.
NARRATOR: But eventually, in
human DNA he spotted something.
A sequence that was different in
13 places compared to chimp DNA.
The trouble was,
he had no idea
what this piece of
DNA actually did.
To find out, he inserted it
into the embryo of a mouse.
To make the effects of
the DNA easier to follow,
he attached it to another gene
that gives off a blue color.
That way he could see
where the gene became
active in the embryo.
As the embryo
developed, the piece of
DNA seemed to be active
all over the place.
But most intriguingly,
it was doing something
in the growing paw.
Well, I thought Wow,
this is really cool.
It was a really striking image.
NARRATOR: What Noonan saw was
that the human DNA became active
in the mouse embryos
thumb and big toe.
It seems that Noonan
may have found a switch
that helps form that
key human attribute:
our thumb,
the part of our hand that gives
us so much power and precision.
Its that power and
precision that enables us
to hold a paintbrush...
manipulate tools...
pilot a jet fighter,
record our thoughts.
All those things that
separate us from other apes.
Of course, having a
nimble hand is one thing,
but you have to
know how to use it.
And for that, you need to have
humankinds other
signature organ:
our brain.
The human brain is vast,
three times bigger
than a chimps,
and is structured
very differently.
How this extraordinary
organ evolved is central
to understanding why
we are the way we are.
It is something that Darwin
himself was at a loss
to explain, which is
why many of his critics
remained unconvinced
by his account of human origins.
But now part of the
answer to why we have
such a remarkable brain may have
come from a surprising source.
Hansell Stedman is
a dedicated athlete
and a medical doctor.
He never imagined he would
come up with an answer
to a profound
evolutionary mystery.
He has devoted his
career to trying
to cure muscular dystrophy--
a distressing and sometimes
fatal degenerative disease.
His quest is very personal.
STEDMAN: My
first exposure to muscular
dystrophy was inescapable;
my younger and my older brother
both born with
muscular dystrophy.
NARRATOR: Muscular dystrophy
is a genetic disease.
Its sufferers have a mutation in
one gene that robs their muscles
of the ability to
repair themselves.
STEDMAN: Typical workout here
on the rocks might blow through
a few thousand muscle cells,
but theyll regenerate overnight
and, if anything, be a little
stronger the next day I come in
as a result of all of that.
Whereas in muscular dystrophy,
the injury process is
greatly accelerated and the
injury process outstrips
the bodys ability to repair.
NARRATOR: In search
of a cure, Stedman is
investigating the hundreds
of genes that control the
development of muscles.
So when the Human Genome
Project took off,
Stedman seized his chance.
STEDMAN: When the horsepower of
the entire Human Genome Project
kicked in, we knew
exactly what to look for.
NARRATOR: Stedman was hunting
for any new muscle-making genes.
And so, as the human
genome was sequenced,
he began sifting through
the vast mountains of data.
Eventually he found what
he was looking for--
a previously unidentified
muscle-making gene.
But there was something
strange about this new gene.
It didnt look like any
other muscle-making genes.
Two letters were missing.
This gene should
cause a disease.
STEDMAN: It became
very clear early on
that if you have a
mutation of this type,
you get some serious
muscle problem going on.
NARRATOR: Here was a puzzle.
Why would humans carry a gene
that was clearly damaged?
Perhaps it was simply
a mistake in the data.
Stedman decided to
dig a little deeper
and look in another
human subject.
STEDMAN: In the department
of true confessions,
we do certain experiments
first on ourself,
largely out of convenience.
You can swab your own cheek
and get working on some DNA.
NARRATOR: To his
utter amazement,
he found the same
damaged gene in himself.
Im seeing this in my own DNA,
and its suggesting
that Wait a minute.
That means theres a muscle
disease here somewhere,
a muscle disease
that Im unaware of.
And I thought it would be
worth checking this out
in some other
members of the lab.
NARRATOR: A few
swabs later and...
STEDMAN: Sure enough,
at the end of the day,
every single person
had the same glitch
in their same DNA
at the same place.
NARRATOR: Here then
was a real mystery.
It seemed that this
particular muscle-making gene
was common in humans.
But when he identified
the same gene in apes,
it was just like any
other muscle-making gene.
Why was there such a difference?
What did this gene
enable one species to do
that the other could not?
Stedman began to research the
role of this gene in apes.
And he found it made one
particular kind of muscle--
the muscle for chewing.
In fact, the muscle
used to close the jaw.
In humans, that genetic
glitch meant that we chew
with just a fraction
of the force of an ape.
This in itself
was interesting,
but where Stedman went
next was truly intriguing
and highly controversial.
He drew a direct connection
between the power
of our jaw muscle
and the evolution
of the human brain.
Stedmans thinking
goes like this.
The skulls of apes and humans
are made of several
independent bone plates.
They let our heads
get bigger as we grow.
The muscles for chewing
pull against these plates.
And in an ape, these
forces can be enormous.
STEDMAN: In the
gorilla, the muscle--
the size of a human
thigh muscle--
lives here and has to go
through this large space
to power the jaw
moving back and forth.
Were not talking
biceps, tricep,
were talking quad here.
This is an enormous muscle
that has to come right
through this hole here
to power the
jaw-closing apparatus.
NARRATOR: Stedman contends
that all this muscle power
forces an apes skull
plates to fuse together
at an early stage,
and this puts limits on how
much the brain can grow.
STEDMAN: In a chimpanzee,
gorilla, orangutan,
those growth plates are
pretty much shut down,
closed for business by about
three, four years of age.
In a human, they remain open
for growth to perhaps age 30.
NARRATOR: This, Stedman
believes, is the key.
A mutation in our jaw muscle
allows the human skull
to keep expanding
into adulthood,
creating a bigger
space for our brain.
And so our most important
organ is able to grow.
Its very cool to us to
think that some kind
of muscle-altering mutation
might have actually been
a signature event
in the evolution
of what makes us
distinct as a species.
It might have been an
absolute prerequisite
for us landing
where we are today.
NARRATOR: But having the space
for a big brain is one thing.
What is needed to
actually grow one?
That is the question that Chris
Walsh is trying to answer.
Hes another scientist
who never expected
to be taking on what
even Darwin didnt know.
WALSH: I never thought that
Id be studying evolution.
Im a neurologist
interested in the brain and kids
with neurological problems.
How you doing, buddy? Are
you doing all right, huh?
You doing okay?
No one was more
surprised than us
to find that the study of kids
with disabilities would lead us
into these fascinating
evolutionary questions.
Is his breathing generally
okay during the day?
Sometimes when he
gets startled, it will
go up fast, like...
(panting)
...but then he calms
himself right back down...
NARRATOR: Walsh
is a specialist in a rare
disorder called microcephaly.
Children with microcephaly
are born with brains
that can be half
the normal size.
WALSH: This disorder
can be very devastating
for the kids that have it.
They typically will have
severe mental retardation,
and so will not be able to
achieve normal language
and normal schooling.
And so its really an event
that defines the whole family.
It defines the lives
not only of the child,
but of the parents
of that child.
And these families
are desperately eager
to try to understand at least
what caused the
disorder in their kids.
NARRATOR: The purpose
of Walshs work
was initially to help families
that might be carrying
any defective genes
causing microcephaly
to plan their lives.
Were able to offer those
families predictive testing,
so that if theyre planning on
having additional children,
we can tell them ahead of time
whether that child is likely
to be affected or not.
NARRATOR: First Walsh
had to decide where to
look in the vast genome
to find any possible
microcephaly-causing genes.
So he focused on one
particular area of DNA.
Other research suggested
it contained a gene
involved in the condition.
That gene is known to control
how and when brain
cells divide in animals,
such as fruit flies and mice.
What this gene seems
to do is help control
the fundamental decision
that the brain has to make,
which is When do
I stop making cells?
When is the brain
big enough?
NARRATOR: Then his
team began searching
for that same gene in a family
with a history of the disease.
And sure enough,
they found something.
A gene that helps
direct brain growth.
And crucially,
it was defective.
Walsh decided to check this
finding in other patients.
WALSH: Once we
found this gene,
we sequenced it in our kids
with microcephaly disorder.
And we found that one
family after another
had a disabling
change in the gene
that completely
removed its function.
NARRATOR: In total he has found
some 21 different mutations
responsible for microcephaly.
Sometimes one of the
DNAs chemical letters
is replaced with another letter.
Sometimes letters
are missing entirely.
But whatever the defect is,
they all stop the brain cells
from dividing at a very
early stage of development.
Walsh was now certain-- thanks
to his microcephaly patients--
he had found a gene key to the
growth of the human brain.
Now he decided to compare
normal versions of the gene
found in healthy humans with
the same gene in chimpanzees,
our closest relatives.
And what he found
was astonishing.
The gene in humans was
radically different
from that found in chimps.
There had been a large
series of mutations.
It could be that these
mutations were a major factor
in the evolution
of our huge brains.
And this discovery came about
only because of Walshs
work with his patients.
I think one of the
amazing things for us
was the extent to which
studying human disease
can unexpectedly enlighten us
about something like
human evolution.
NARRATOR: But this is only the
beginning of our understanding
of the evolution
of the human brain.
Its an area of research that
is now attracting scientists
with a range of skills that
Darwin would have marveled at.
Katie Pollard is a
biostatistician.
Her life is spent
crunching numbers.
POLLARD: What I love about
my work is geeking out
on a computer and
writing programs
and thinking about biology.
And that in doing this, Im
actually working on something
that not just
scientists care about,
but really every human
being can relate to
and cares profoundly about,
and thats what makes us human.
NARRATOR: Pollard has
constructed an ambitious
computer program.
Its designed to highlight DNA
that is similar in
apes and other animals,
but which is very
different in humans.
That way, she hopes to identify
the key DNA that makes us, us.
POLLARD: Out of these
15 million letters
that make humans
different from chimps,
we need to try to figure out
which ones were important.
And so we use a technique
which is to look for places
where human is
different from chimp,
but chimp looks almost
identical to the other animals.
NARRATOR: She too is looking for
DNA relating to the human brain.
POLLARD: The brain is one of the
things thats changed the most
during human evolution,
both in terms of its
complexity and its size.
And so when we look
to find the parts
or our genome that
make us human,
were particularly interested
in finding out whether
these are things that are
involved in the brain.
NARRATOR: It is a huge
feat of number crunching,
as Pollard loaded
in DNA sequences
from both humans and chimps.
POLLARD: You basically take a
bunch of computer hard drives
and you stack them up together.
We were able to take a
task that would have run
for 35 years on a
desktop computer
and do it in one afternoon.
NARRATOR: And at the
end of that afternoon,
they had a whole
array of material
charting the differences
between humans and chimps.
Importantly, many
of those differences
were not in the actual genes.
They were in switches.
POLLARD: It turns out
that the vast majority
are not genes.
Instead theyre pieces of our DNA
that we can think
of as switches--
theyre pieces of DNA that turn
a nearby gene on or off...
that tell it where, in
what cells in our body,
in what tissue, at what time or
at what level to be operating.
NARRATOR: And there was
something even more intriguing
about those switches.
A large number of
them, more than half,
were nearby a gene that
was involved in the brain.
NARRATOR: In Pollards work,
one particular piece
of DNA stood out.
It was a piece of DNA
that is known to be active
in the development of one of the
key parts of the human brain
in the embryo...
the cortex.
The cortex is that wrinkled
outer layer of our brain.
Its vital for those
defining human capabilities
like language, music
and mathematics.
When she looked at
that DNA in chimps
and compared it to the
same DNA in a chicken,
it was different in
just two letters.
But in humans it was
different by 18 letters.
A massive mutation.
This was about as great of a
eureka moment as you could have
as a scientist.
NARRATOR: So here is another
intriguing piece of evidence
suggesting how DNA can shape our
distinctive human qualities.
We now know that DNA works
in many different ways,
through genes that make
the stuff of our bodies,
through switches that turn
those genes on and off
and through sequences
of DNAs chemicals
that throw those switches.
Taken together, what
this all adds up to
is a way that we can
at last understand
how small differences in DNA
can generate enormous change.
POLLARD: Basically, you
can make massive changes
just changing those switches.
So a small change, a couple
of DNA letters, could have
a profound effect.
NARRATOR: And so that
final Darwinian puzzle--
how a human can be so
closely related to an ape
and yet be so different-- is
now slowly being answered.
150 years after Darwin first
put forward his grand theory
to explain the great
diversity of life,
the scientists who carry on his
legacy have advanced his work
in wondrous ways.
I think if Darwin
were here today,
hed be absolutely stunned,
delighted, even moved to see
how much his theory has grown.
TABIN: What we now
are able to understand
on the one hand would
just blow him away.
But I also think it would give
him enormous satisfaction,
because ultimately everything
weve been learning validates
the things that he said.
JUDSON: I think that Darwin
was a remarkable scientist
and absolutely
should be celebrated.
However, I do not think that
he was the end of evolution.
On the contrary, I think
he was the beginning.
He outlined the major points,
but we have discovered more
than I think he would
have imagined possible.
NARRATOR: As we celebrate the
200th birthday of Charles Darwin
and the 150th anniversary
of his great work,
there is still much
more to understand
about how the endless forms
of nature have arisen.
And in rising to
that challenge,
it is likely that we will
continue to advance medicine
and come to a better
understanding
of ourselves as well.
NOVA has a brand-new
evolution Web site
with dozens of videos,
interviews, slide shows
and the latest in
evolutionary science.
Bookmark it today and let
us know what you think.
Find it at pbs.org.
Major funding for NOVA is
provided by the following:
ExxonMobil,
taking on the worlds
toughest energy challenges.
And by David H. Koch.
And...
And by the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions to
your PBS station from:
Additional funding by
Promega Corporation,
discovering every day.
Promega, the science of life.
And by the Wisconsin Alumni
Research Foundation,
in support of the
University of Wisconsin.
Captioned by Media Access
Group at WGBH access.wgbh.org